=TranslateRoutes
This Rails plugin provides a simple way to translate your URLs to any number of languages.
All routes automatically add a <tt>:lang</tt> parameter to the request so your controllers can setup an internationalized user experience.

The plugin has been designed to be easy to use and customize. 
As it works after routing processing, it plays nice with all kind of routing definitions, including RESTful and named routes.
It also takes care of your current routing helpers by translating them transparently.

==Installation
Just check it out on your app's <tt>/vendor/plugins</tt> and see the examples below.

==Usage
Let's start with a tiny example. Of course you need to define your routes first, e.g:

	ActionController::Routing::Routes.draw do |map| 
	  map.connect 'contact', :controller => 'contact', :action => 'index'
	end

After that, on the same routes.rb file, you can translate the generated route by doing:

	ActionController::Routing::Translator.translate do |t|
	  t['es'] = {
	    'contact' => 'contacto'
	  }
	end

This will give you the next routes (check it out by doing 'rake routes'):

	/es/contacto {:lang=>"es", :controller=>"contact", :action=>"index"}
	/contact     {:lang=>"en", :controller=>"contact", :action=>"index"}

As you can see:
- a +lang+ param has been added to your routes, with the value of the used language (*)
- +en+ is the default language (*)
- the URLs associated with a language are always prefixed with the language code that you provided on the translation.
- the default language URLs have no language prefix (*)
(*) You can customize this behaviour, see "Configuration" below.

Let's add some routes and translations to our example:

	ActionController::Routing::Routes.draw do |map| 
	  map.connect 'contact', :controller => 'contact', :action => 'index'
	  map.home '', :controller => 'main', :action => 'index'
	  map.resources :people
	end
	
	ActionController::Routing::Translator.translate do |t|

	  t['es'] = {
	    'contact' => 'contacto',
	    'people' => 'gente',
			'new' => 'crear',
			'edit' =>'editar'
		}

	  t['fr'] = {
			'people' => 'personne',
			'new' => 'neuf'
		}
	end

Again, you can use <tt>rake routes</tt> to see the generated URLs. I'll only talk about some of them:

We didn't give any french translation for +contact+, so the french associated URLs use the untranslated text:

	/fr/contact                   {:lang=>"fr", :controller=>"contact", :action=>"index"}
	/es/contacto                  {:lang=>"es", :controller=>"contact", :action=>"index"}
	/contact                      {:lang=>"en", :controller=>"contact", :action=>"index"}

The named routes have generated not only translated URLs but also a helper for each language:

	home_fr        /fr                           {:lang=>"fr", :controller=>"main", :action=>"index"}
	home_es        /es                           {:lang=>"es", :controller=>"main", :action=>"index"}
	home_en        /                             {:lang=>"en", :controller=>"main", :action=>"index"}

This means that you can use +home_es_path+ and +home_es_url+ on your controllers and views.

No +home+ named route is shown on the list so it looks like you can't use a simple +home_path+ helper, but relax: you have a +home_path+ helper available for your controllers and views. It looks for the current +lang+ value and redirects to the appropiate helper. This means that if you're rendering the <tt>contact/index</tt> view when visiting <tt>/es/contacto</tt>, the +home_path+ helper will call to +home_es_path+ and return its result. The same applies to +home_url+, obviously.

We can see that resource controllers and actions are translated as well:

	new_person_fr GET   /fr/personne/neuf             {:lang=>"fr", :controller=>"people", :action=>"new"}
	new_person_es GET   /es/gente/crear               {:lang=>"es", :controller=>"people", :action=>"new"}
	new_person GET    	/people/new                   {:lang=>"en", :controller=>"people", :action=>"new"}

We can get rid of that verbose translation hashes by using yaml files. Create a file inside your <tt>/config</tt> directory, called <tt>routes_es.yml</tt> and fill it with your desired translations, e.g:

	# /config/routes_es.yml
	person: persona

and replace all the

	ActionController::Routing::Translator.translate do  
		... 
	end

stuff on <tt>routes.rb</tt> with this simple line:

	ActionController::Routing::Translator.translate_from_files

== Integration
You can find a sample Rails application on the translate_routes repository, designed to show how easy is to setup 

== Configuration
You can customize some features by adding some lines before your translation code:

- You can change the language param key (<tt>:lang</tt> by default). To change this feature use:

	ActionController::Routing::Translator.lang_param_key = :foo

This key should have the same name that the instance variable which keeps the language code on your controllers and views.

- You can change the default language of your application with:

	ActionController::Routing::Translator.default_lang = 'es'

Of course, you can also translate your default language. If, as I do, all your controllers and actions have english names, you can have an english version on your site for free by doing:

	ActionController::Routing::Translator.default_lang = 'es'
	ActionController::Routing::Translator.translate do |t|
	  t['en'] = {}
	  t['es'] = { # spanish translation	here }
	end

or adding the equivalent <tt>/config/routes_es.yml</tt> and an empty <tt>/config/routes_en.yml</tt>

- You can add a prefix also on your default language routes by doing:

	ActionController::Routing::Translator.prefix_on_default_lang = true

<b>WARNING!</b> this way you'll disable your root -empty- route: if english is your default language, your empty route will be translated to <tt>/en</tt> so you must manually take care of it.

== Suggestions, bug reports, questions
Feedback and comments will be always welcome at raul@murciano.net


== Credits
- Raul Murciano [http://raul.murciano.net] - code
- Domestika INTERNET S.L [http://domestika.org] - incredible support, really nice people to work with!


== Rails routing resources
- David Black's 'Rails Routing' ebook rocks! - 'Ruby for Rails' too, BTW.
- Obie Fernandez's 'The Rails Way' - the definitive RoR reference, great work Obie!

== License
Copyright (c) 2007
Raul Murciano [http://raul.murciano.net]
Domestika INTERNET S.L. [http://domestika.org], released under the MIT license (see MIT-LICENSE)
